1 of 9
COMP0004 Coursework Feedback
Below is a list of feedback comments covering a range of issues seen in the coursework
submissions, along with advice on general good practice for design and programming.
Some of these may apply to your work, read through the list to review the items and see if
you can improve your skills.
When marking, all submissions were compiled and run as far as was possible. Your
marksheet contains feedback specific to the results of that process if needed, along with a
general statement on your relative progress in learning to program and on how good your
report was. If your feedback was relatively short that means there weren’t specific issues
to raise on the marksheet – which is good!
Source Code
1. Source code should be well structured and properly formatted. The IDE will
automatically format source code, so take advantage of that.
2. Code and comments are mostly reasonable but could be tidied up in some places. For
example, some lines may be too long and should be broken up with new lines to
maintain the formatting, or there are unnecessary blank lines, or the comment is
difficult to read.
3. Don’t use tab characters in source code. Don’t leave commented-out lines of source
code, if the code is not used remove it before submission!
4. Pointless comments. Comments should add information to the code, not state what is
obvious from reading the code. For example, the comment ‘Initialise the instance
variables ’in a constructor adds nothing. A comment should explain ‘why ’not ‘what’,
adding value to the code.
‘Why ’means explain the rationale of the code, why is it this way, rules, logic, the
underlying reason for the code or design. These are things that cannot be determined
by reading the code.
‘What ’means an explanation of the code itself, which should be obvious by reading the
code if it is properly written, making the comment redundant.
Also remove default comments added by IDEs, such as this example:
 /*
 * To change this template, choose Tools | Templates
 * and open the template in the editor.
 */
5. The source code is acceptable but the commenting is poor, reducing the readability of
the source code. Always remember to make your source code readable by other
programmers (or yourself in a few months time!).
6. Code compiles but there are issues and it doesn’t always run correctly and/or do
anything useful. Review your code carefully, just because it compiles doesn’t mean it is
2 of 9
well written or even works. You will learn much more about testing code in the 2nd year
Software Engineering module.
7. Code won’t compile. The IDE can help a lot, underlining problems in the source code
and offering potential fixes, so take advantage of that. Fix one error at a time, starting
with the error at the top of the list shown. When that is fixed and you have tried
compiling again, move to the next error. Errors lower down in the list may be sideeffects of ones higher up and not actually real errors, so don’t waste time trying to fix
them out of sequence.
8. Don’t try and write a lot of code before compiling it. Work in small steps so that when
you get a compilation error it is obvious what you last did to cause the error. Take note
of all the help and options the IDE gives you.
9. Check your spelling! For variable, class and method names and also in comments and
data. For example: Object-Oriented not Object-Orientated. Its versus it’s. Punctuation
used correctly.
Doing good quality work is important and that includes the spelling.
10.Beware of cast expressions. With generics, cast expressions are needed much less
frequently, especially when getting values from data structures. If you find yourself
using a cast expression take a good look at the design to see if it can be eliminated,
treat a cast expression as an error unless it is really needed. If you have a reference of
superclass type avoid casting it to a subclass type. This is known as downcasting and
is frequently an indication of a serious design problem.
For example, if you have a class Person and a subclass Technician you can have a
variable of type Person referring to a Technician object. If you try to cast the Person
reference to Technician:
Person aPerson = new Technician(...);
...
Technician t = (Technician)aPerson;
then you need to ask why you need to do this. The Person class should either declare
all the methods that will be called on the Technician object, so the cast is not needed,
or the design should be changed so that the Technician object is referred to only by
references of type Technician. Remember also that a cast expression can cause a
runtime error if the object referred to is not of the type expected.
11.No public instance variables and/or don’t leave out public/protected/private altogether!
Declare all instance variables private unless you have a very good reason not to (there
is no good reason!).
Definitely don’t declare a public variable (either static or instance) and then access it
from another class using an expression like: obj.someVariable = 10;.
12.Class names should start with a capital letter. This is a usage convention rather than a
language rule, so has no effect on whether a class compiles or not. However,
programmers expect class names to start with a capital and it helps identify a name as
a class name.
3 of 9
13.Don’t use a public static variable as a global data structure. Use a private instance
variable in class and create an instance of the class with getter/setter methods. Or use
the Singleton Pattern.
14.Don’t have empty compound statements. For example, this code:
if (someTest())
{ }
else
{ return aValue; }
can be rewritten as:
if (!someTest())
{ return aValue; }
This uses the not operator (!) to reverse the boolean expression.
15.Other than main, don’t write static methods unless you understand what they are
meant to be used for.
16.Don’t use static variables in place of instance variables. Doing so will sooner or later
cause major problems.
17.If you find yourself writing a class full of static variables and methods, then there is
either a very good reason, or you have the design wrong. Sometimes static methods
can “solve” compilation problems as they don’t have to be called on a method, giving
the impression that everything is valid but it isn’t really.
18.Beware of extra semi-colons. For example, writing:
if (a == b);
{
 System.out.print(a);
}
is valid code that will compile but note the semi-colon following the boolean
expression. This will terminate the if statement and the following compound
statement will always be evaluated.
19.Don’t name all your methods do<Something>. The ‘do’ part is redundant and the
naming also implies that you are not following an OO approach.
20.A .java file should contain one Java class only (excluding nested classes). Putting
multiple classes into the same file will sooner or later cause problems with the
compiler.
21.Split up monster methods. If a method has more than 15-20 lines it most likely needs to
be split into several smaller methods. For example:
public void myMethod()
{
4 of 9
 first part
 … lots of code
 second part
 … lots more code
 third part
 .. even more code
}
then each part can become a simpler method and the code replaced with a method
 call:
public void myMethod()
{
 call firstMethod()
 call secondMethod()
 call thirdMethod()
}
The original method calls the new methods and becomes a control or manager
method. The new methods contain sections of code extracted from the original
method. Parameters and/or return values may need to be added. The IDE
refactoring called Extract Method will make this easy to do, and undo if needed.
The new method names, hopefully chosen well to make the intent of each method
clear, will remove the need for comments and make the code more readable.
As you will learn in the second year, the longer a method gets the harder it is to test.
22.Following from the previous item, if a method is structured like this:
if ( something) { ... }
else
if (somethingelse) { ... }
else
if (anotherthing) { ... }
split the method up to extract the if statement bodies into separate methods. Also
 look at using a switch statement.
23.If a method returns a value using an if statement, don’t write this:
if (boolean exp)
{ return true; }
else
{ return false; }
Instead use this:
return boolean exp;
The if statement is unnecessary and just clutters up the code!
5 of 9
24.When using pathnames to access files or directories, don’t assume the program will be
run on a particular operating system, as the file name formats differ between Windows
and Unix. Windows uses drive letters and ‘\ ’as a name separator, for example
c:\someplace\myfile.txt. Unix doesn’t use drive letters and uses ‘/ ’as a name separator,
for example /users/home/someplace/myfile.txt.
Class File provides a way of getting the right character to use: File.separator will return
the character for the operating system the program is currently running on. Don’t use
drive letters at all.
25.Pathnames for data files should be relative not specified in a specific place in the
filestore using an absolute pathname. An absolute name gives the exact location
starting from the root directory, while a relative name give the path based on where the
program actually is in the filestore. An absolute name won’t work on a different
machine.
26.When using generic class like ArrayList or HashMap make sure the parameter type is
specified in all the places it is needed. For example:
ArrayList<String> a = new ArrayList();
should be:
ArrayList<String> a = new ArrayList<>();
Note that the angle brackets on the right hand side can be empty as the parameter
type String will be inferred. You can still include String if you want:
ArrayList<String> a = new ArrayList<String>();
If you don’t do this the compiler will display a message like this:
Note: Some input files use unchecked or unsafe operations.
Note: Recompile with -Xlint:unchecked for details.
27.Don’t leave a method with an empty method body. Either remove it or fill in the method
body.
28.Don’t leave an empty catch block in a try-catch statement. If there isn’t anything useful
you can put in the catch block it is either in the wrong method, or you need to rethink
why you are using the exception handling mechanism in the section of code.
29.Don’t use class Vector. Although it is still included in the class libraries you should be
using ArrayList or one of the other generic data structure classes.
30.Don’t use cryptic variable and method names. A name should be pronounceable and
reflect the use of the variable or method.
31.Don’t use == to compare Strings. The == operator will compare object references and
tell you if the two String objects are the same object. To compare the values of two
different String objects to see if they represent the same string you should use the
equals or compareTo methods.
6 of 9
32.Learn how to use your IDE, especially IntelliJ IDEA. It will have many features and
short cuts that will make your programming more efficient (and fun!).
33.The Intellij IDE can analyse your code (see the Inspect Code item in the Analyse
menu). Make use of this to identify problems with your code, for example a variable
that has been defined but never used, or methods that are never called. Check for and
remove unused code, variables and methods.
Design
1. Less than 3 classes. The classes are probably not good abstractions.
2. The classes chosen do not represent a good set of abstractions for the problem being
solved. Keep your classes cohesive, focussed on representing one abstraction well. A
class should only have one reason for changing, to improve the implementation of the
abstraction it represents. If a class has to change for several unrelated reasons then it
a poor abstraction and needs splitting up into two or more classes.
3. One or more classes are getting too large and less cohesive. If a class contains a
larger number of methods (e.g., greater than 10) consider splitting it into several
smaller classes.
4. Don’t write a procedural program (like a C program) and then spread out all the
methods into classes to try and make the program look object-oriented.
5. Don’t identify a collection of procedures (methods) and then try to create a class out of
each procedure so you end up with a collection of classes containing one method.
6. If you have a class which is just a collection of unrelated methods with no instance
variables, then it is probably not a good class. In the worst case it is a dumping ground
for methods you can’t fit it another class!
You can have a utility class with a collection of related methods, but you do need to
make sure the methods are clearly related. For example, class Math in the standard
Java library is a utility class containing the set of methods implementing mathematical
operations.
7. The design is confused and needs re-thinking. Will anyone else understand your
design? If you don’t understand it nobody will!
8. Better class names could have been chosen. Use a name that makes clear the role or
intent of the class. You can rename classes as you find better names, and it is often
the case that you don’t find a better name until well into the coding work when you
better understand the design and abstractions. The IntelliJ IDE makes it easy to
change class names using the rename refactoring.
9. Don’t use plural class names. If an object of a class is intended to hold a collection of
other objects (e.g., a Library holds a list of Books), use a singular name for the class.
For example, use FileCollection or FileStore for a class that holds a collection of files.
7 of 9
Don’t make the mistake of creating, for example, a Book class and try to use it to
represent a collection of books as well as a single book. This is muddling up the ideas
of an object to represent a book with a collection of books.
10.Don’t have a class name which is a verb, find a noun instead. For example, you might
name a class to manage a search as Searching, where it would be better to use a
name like SearchController or SearchManager. Or you might use ListLoader rather
than LoadLists.
If you find yourself using verbs as names, beware of creating classes just to wrap
single methods as you a probably using a procedural design and wrapping the code in
classes.
11.Don’t use public static variables unless they are declared as final and treated as
constants. Using non-final public static variables and accessing them directly from
other classes is a poor design strategy, resulting in poor encapsulation and increased
coupling (dependencies between classes).
If you must have variables accessible to multiple parts of a program then create a class
using private instance variables along with setters and getters, and use the Singleton
pattern to allow only one object of the class to be created. Note, however, that this will
increase the dependencies between the different parts.
If possible, modify the program design to avoid the need for such “global” variables.
12.Beware of unintended recursion. In particular, when displaying menus for a text-based
interface to your program.
For example, if you have a run method that contains a loop to display a menu and run
a command, make sure the menu display or command methods do not recursively call
the run method. They should simply return so the next iteration of the run loop displays
the menu again.
13.No working load and/or save to file. Important functionality is missing as the program
cannot store data between runs.
14.Creating a subclass of ArrayList to get a list of something class (e.g., list of items) is a
bad design strategy as the subclass will inherit all the public methods of ArrayList that
are not appropriate for the subclass. Use association instead so that the list of
something class uses an ArrayList via a private instance variable.
15.Remove duplicate or similar code. If you have code in two or more methods or classes
that looks similar or is the same (copy and paste code), then try to remove the
duplication. Use techniques like extracting shared code into a single method or
creating a superclass to hold shared code used by subclasses.
16.A Servlet should act as a controller, providing a doGet or doPost method to respond to
a request, coordinate the use of the model to process the request, and redirect to a
Java Server Page (JSP) to generate the response HTML web page.
8 of 9
17.JSP pages should only contain Java code needed to display the output correctly, don’t
put other computations in them.
18.A servlet should not manipulate the data directly, access data files, or carry out
computations on the data. Those activities should be carried out by the model.
19.It would is better to have separate servlets for each action (end point) rather than
putting everything into one servlet.
20.Servlet, html and jsp file names are case sensitive. Check that names match when
used in html links, redirects and other places.
21.Put all the css into separate css files, don’t add css to html or jsp files, especially if that
causes duplication.
22.Don’t use System.out.println or similar to print out messages unless using them for
debugging (in which case remove them before submitting the work). For a web
application printing messages out using System.out.println isn't going to be helpful
unless you happen to have the terminal open from which you ran the program. Usually
though, a web application is run without a terminal and you really need to have proper
logging rather than just printing out to the standard output, as the output will never be
seen.
23.The data files should not be stored in the src directory, as you don't want to mix up
source files with data files. Also, source directories are not normally available when an
application is deployed and run in actual use.
Report
1. The report lacks details and contains too many general statements (e.g., “objectoriented design is good”—how did you use it?).
2. Don’t exaggerate! Using words like ‘very’, ‘extremely’ or ‘exceedingly’ to describe
something in your report stands out as being inaccurate. Your design may be
“extremely good” but you need to fully justify that statement.
3. Proofread your report before submitting it!
4. The report is a technical document and should have a clear structure, which is the
sections specified by the coursework question sheet, and possibly sub-sections if there
are specific subtopics addressed within a section. Each section and sub-section should
have a title.
5. Use multiple paragraphs, typically no more that 3-4 sentences in length. Long
paragraphs make reading a technical report harder and emphasise a lack of thought
about the structure.
9 of 9
6. Don’t let sentences get too long, maybe two lines at most. Make sure you use commas
correctly.

Maven
1. Don’t ignore Maven warning messages; fix the problem before continuing. Look out for
duplicate dependencies, in particular.
2. Don’t let the IDE (or AI) modify the pom.xml file unless you understand what it is doing.
In particular, don’t let it add dependencies or change versions
3. Learn about Maven plugins to ensure they are configured correctly in the pom.xml file.
The example pom.xml did all you needed, but modifying or deleting plugins can partly
break it. Note that plugins are different from dependencies.